TICK?"
WITH JOHN STOSSEL.
THE TEEN YEARS ARE
AN AMAZING TIME.
PUBERTY MAKES HORMONES RAGE,
SEXUAL PASSION EXPLODES, OFTEN
BEFORE THE ADOLESCENT HAS
THE WISDOM TO DEAL WITH IT.
AND TEENS EXPERIENCE HUGE GROWTH
SPURTS.
SO SUDDENLY, THEY'RE
IN A BRAND-NEW, MUCH BIGGER
BODY, WITH NEW DESIRES.
WOW.
**
IS IT SURPRISING THAT
THEY SOMETIMES DO STRANGE
THINGS?
WOO!
THIS IS A RAVE
IN CONNECTICUT, AN IMMENSE DANCE
PARTY WITH THROBBING ELECTRONIC
MUSIC.
18-YEAR-OLD AURA DIMON OFTEN
DRIVES HOURS TO GET TO RAVES,
WHERE SHE'LL DANCE ALL NIGHT,
SOMETIMES UNTIL HER FEET BLEED.
TO AN OLD GUY LIKE ME, THIS
SEEMS PRETTY STUPID, BUT IN ALL
THIS TEENAGE CRAZINESS THERE IS
AN ENERGY, A PASSION FOR LIFE
THAT OFTEN CREATES GOOD THINGS.
**
AURA, FOR EXAMPLE, ISN'T JUST
HERE TO DANCE.
SHE'S TAKING PICTURES
FOR INSPIRATION BECAUSE SHE HAS
HER OWN CLOTHING BUSINESS.
AND IT'S A SUCCESSFUL ONE.
THE KIDS, THEY WILL BUY
WHATEVER SHE PUTS OUT AT THIS
POINT.
IT'S COOL.
**
Reporter: A NEW YORK
NIGHTCLUB HOSTS A FASHION SHOW
OF HER DESIGNS.
SHE'S SUCCESSFUL, SOME PEOPLE
SAY, BECAUSE HER TEENAGE PASSION
GIVES HER THE ENERGY TO WORK
HARDER THAN OLDER DESIGNERS.
HOW MANY HOURS A DAY DO
YOU SPEND THINKING
ABOUT OR WORKING ON CLOTHING?
ALMOST EVERY SINGLE HOUR
OF MY LIFE.
Reporter: SOME DAYS SHE'LL
DESIGN FOR TEN STRAIGHT HOURS.
'CAUSE THIS IS WHAT MAKES ME
HAPPY.
MY QUESTION IS, WHAT IS THIS?
Reporter: AND SOME SAY SHE'S
SUCCESSFUL BECAUSE AS A TEEN,
HER YOUNG MIND IS MORE OPEN
TO NEW IDEAS, LIKE PANTS MADE
OUT OF SHOWER CURTAINS
OR CONSTRUCTION MESH.
SHE INVENTS NEW THINGS THAT
YOUNG PEOPLE CAN'T GET
ENOUGH OF.
THESE ARE REALLY COOL.
THIS TYPE OF THING
EXCITES ME.
Reporter: THIS DOESN'T EXCITE
YOU?
NOT REALLY, JOHN.
I DON'T WANT A SEAM IN THE BACK.
WELL, YOU SEE THE WAY IT'S
TAILING OUT BACK HERE?
I LIKE THAT, THOUGH.
Reporter: BEAU BAKER, WHO
FINANCED HER, HAS TO DEAL
WITH HER DEMANDS THAT EVERYTHING
BE DONE HER WAY.
AS WE GET OLDER, I THINK
WE LEARN TO BE AFRAID OF THINGS.
AND SHE HASN'T GOT THAT.
SO EVERYTHING SHE DOES, SHE DOES
WITH A HUGE AMOUNT OF PASSION.
WE'VE GOT TO TRY TO DO IT.
IT'S A BLESSING AND IT'S
A CURSE.
I JUST HAVE TO HAVE THE SENSE
TO HOLD ON TIGHT ENOUGH AND MAKE
SURE THAT SHE DOESN'T JUMP OFF
A CLIFF.
Reporter: WHAT WE ADULTS CALL
JUMPING OFF A CLIFF MAY BE JUST
A TEENAGER USING HER EXTRA
PASSION AND OPEN MIND TO CREATE
NEW THINGS.
TEENAGE CHESS PRODIGIES
BOBBY FISCHER AND GARY KASPAROV
FOUND ATTACKS THEIR ELDERS NEVER
CONCEIVED OF.
JARON LANIER WAS 15 WHEN
HE INVENTED THE COMPUTER
SIMULATION VIRTUAL REALITY.
PICASSO WAS JUST 14 WHEN
HE PAINTED MASTERPIECES LIKE
THIS.
TODAY, IN WHITTIER, CALIFORNIA,
13-YEAR-OLD ALEXANDRA NECHITA IS
SOMETIMES CALLED "THE PETITE
PICASSO."
SHE PAINTS PICTURES SOME CALL
MIRACULOUS.
SHE'S SOLD SOME FOR MORE THAN
$100,000.
I JUST HAVE TO PAINT.
IT JUST COMES OUT.
NOW, IT'S JUST WHOOSH, WHOOSH,
WHOOSH.
THERE IS SO MUCH ENERGY WITHIN
ME THAT I JUST KEEP ON GOING
AND GOING AND GOING.
Reporter: HER TEENAGE PASSION
IS PART OF IT.
SHE PAINTS FOR HOURS EVERY DAY.
BUT SHE ALSO HAS THAT CHILDISH
DETERMINATION TO DO JUST WHAT
SHE WANTS, NO MATTER WHAT
OTHERS SAY.
ALEXANDRA'S CLASSMATES MOCKED
HER BECAUSE HER DRAWINGS WERE
STRANGE.
SHE JUST KEPT PAINTING.
THAT'S FANTASTIC.
Reporter: NOW, HER WORK HANGS
IN GALLERIES AROUND THE WORLD.
ANDRE AGASSI JUST BOUGHT ONE.
LAST YEAR, 12 YEARS OLD,
NOW 13.
SHE'S REMARKABLE.
ADULTS PUT STOPS
TO THEIR IMAGINATION
BECAUSE THEY'RE AFRAID THAT
IT'LL DO THIS OR IT'LL DO THAT.
BUT CHILDREN ARE SO INNOCENT.
THEIR MIND'S ALWAYS EXPLODING
WITH NEW IDEAS, NEW IDEAS.
THEY HAVE NO LIMITS IN LIFE.
Reporter: ARE TEENAGERS
REALLY THAT DIFFERENT
FROM ADULTS?
WELL, YES, SAY RESEARCHERS HERE
AT HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL'S
BRAIN IMAGING CENTER.
SIT RIGHT DOWN.
LIE BACK.
GET NICE AND COMFORTABLE.
Reporter: HERE, THEY PUT
TEENAGERS, AND THEN PEOPLE
MY AGE, INTO THE MRI SO THEY CAN
WATCH HOW OUR BRAINS WORK.
OKAY.
YOU'RE ALL SET?
Reporter: ALL SET.
ALL RIGHT.
HERE WE GO.
STAY NICE AND STILL.
Reporter: THE DOCTOR
IN CHARGE,
DEBORAH YURGELUN-TODD, SAYS WHEN
I AND OTHER ADULTS ANSWER
QUESTIONS, WE USE THE RATIONAL,
THINKING PART OF OUR BRAIN.
THE DORSAL-LATERAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX.
Reporter: AND THE TEENAGERS
USE A DIFFERENT PART?
RIGHT.
KIDS USE THE REGION BEHIND HERE,
CALLED THE AMYGDALA.
Reporter: THAT'S
THE INSTINCTUAL PART
OF THEIR BRAIN, AND THIS MAY
EXPLAIN THEIR CREATIVITY.
SOME OF OUR BETTER CREATIVE
WORKS OCCUR DURING THIS TIME
OF LIFE BECAUSE THERE'S NOT THAT
SENSE OF "I SHOULDN'T DO THIS"
OR "I CAN'T DO THIS."
**
Reporter: LOOK HOW MUCH
ORIGINAL MUSIC IS CREATED
BY TEENS.
MICHAEL JACKSON WON MALE
VOCALIST OF THE YEAR WHEN
HE WAS 13.
**
BY THE TIME MOZART WAS 19, HE'D
WRITTEN 45 SYMPHONIES.
**
18-YEAR-OLD BLUES GUITARIST
JONNY LANG FILLS CONCERT HALLS
WITH FANS WHO CAN'T BELIEVE WHAT
HE CAN DO.
I THINK HE'S GREAT.
AMAZING FO
GO AHEAD AND LIE TO ME *
Reporter: TWO YEARS AGO, LANG
HAD AMERICA'S NUMBER ONE BLUES
ALBUM.
HE SAYS WHEN HE WAS 13,
HE PLAYED HIS GUITAR 12 HOURS
*
I DIDN'T CARE ABOUT ANYTHING
ELSE BUT PLAYING, YOU KNOW,
LIKE ANYTHING.
**
Reporter: AND AT 18, JONNY
ASSUMES HE'LL HAVE THIS ENERGY
ALL HIS LIFE.
DO YOU THINK MAYBE YOU'LL JUST
GET LESS INSPIRED IN 10 YEARS,
20 YEARS?
LESS ENERGETIC?
I ALWAYS USE B.B. KING
AS AN EXAMPLE FOR THIS, LIKE,
YOU WATCH HIM AND THAT.
HE'S 74 NOW, AND HE DOESN'T LOOK
LIKE HE'S LOST AN OUNCE
OF ANYTHING.
Reporter: IF WE ASKED
B.B. KING, YOU'D THINK HE'D SAY
HE'S AS PASSIONATE NOW AS HE WAS
WHEN HE WAS YOUR AGE?
I DON'T THINK THAT IT'S LESS
OF AN ENERGY.
OH, WHAT A WONDERFUL GUY.
BUT NO, I DO NOT HAVE THE ENERGY
TODAY THAT I HAD WHEN I WAS 17.
* I'VE BEEN AROUND
A LONG TIME,
A PERFECT 10!
Reporter: I THINK YOU CAN
EVEN SEE THE DIFFERENCE
IN THE SMILES.
WE ADULTS RARELY LET IT OUT LIKE
THIS, OUR SMILES AREN'T
THIS BIG.
IT'S WONDERFUL TO WATCH
A TEENAGER LIKE VENUS WILLIAMS
WIN A MATCH.
AND TEENS HAVE BEEN SETTING ALL
ASTER THAN
WHEN HE WAS A TEEN.
SOME SAY THE TEENS SET RECORDS
BECAUSE THEIR PASSION MAKES THEM
WORK HARDER.
18-YEAR-OLD AL HARRINGTON LOVES
BASKETBALL SO MUCH, HE WORKS OUT
SEVEN HOURS A DAY.
HE CAN'T GET ENOUGH.
AL!
Reporter: BECAUSE HE GETS
SO MUCH JOY OUT OF THE GAME.
ONCE I GO PAST A PERSON, IT'S
JUST LIKE SUNSHINE.
YOU JUST SEE THE SUN UP THERE.
AND IT'S ALL LIT UP.
HARRINGTON, ALL ALONE,
BADA BOOM!
Reporter: THIS YEAR, HE WAS
A FIRST-ROUND DRAFT PICK
IN THE NBA, AHEAD OF HUNDREDS
OF COLLEGE PLAYERS.
MAYBE HE GOT THIS GOOD
BECAUSE HE WAS TAKING
2,000 PRACTICE SHOTS EVERY DAY.
JUST HOW MUCH MORE ENERGY DO
TEENS HAVE?
WE RAN SOME TESTS AT THIS SPORTS
MEDICINE CLINIC.
BEN, YOUR TASK TODAY IS
TO KEEP UP WITH THE TREADMILL.
Reporter: FIRST, WE INVITED
18-YEAR-OLD BEN MULLIGAN TO TAKE
AN AEROBIC TEST.
IT MEASURES HOW MUCH OXYGEN
YOU DELIVER TO YOUR MUSCLES.
WHILE THE TESTERS MAKE YOU RUN
FASTER AND MORE UPHILL.
THAT'S IT, HANG IN A LITTLE
BIT MORE.
COME ON.
Reporter: THE RESEARCHERS
HERE SAY SIMPLY BECAUSE BEN'S
A TEENAGER, HIS HEART CAN PUMP
MORE BLOOD AND PROCESS MORE
OXYGEN THAN MINE.
THEY HAVE HIM RUN UNTIL HE CAN'T
RUN ANYMORE.
REALLY GOOD TEST.
THAT WAS A REAL MAXIMAL TEST.
Reporter: NOW, I EXERCISE
REGULARLY.
I THOUGHT I COULD DO AS WELL
AS A TEEN ON THIS TEST,
BUT THE PHYSIOLOGIST HERE SAYS,
"NO WAY."
YOU ASSUME HIS BODY WILL JUST DO
THINGS MINE CAN'T.
I CAN GUARANTEE IT.
Reporter: SURE ENOUGH, WHEN
IT WAS MY TURN ON THE MACHINE,
THEY COULD SEE THE DIFFERENCE.
JOHN, YOU'RE SOUNDING
A LITTLE BIT HEAVIER
ON YOUR FEET THAN BEN DID
AT THIS POINT.
HOW ARE YOU FEELING?
[ MUMBLING ]
Reporter: I GAVE UP SEVERAL
MINUTES SOONER THAN BEN DID.
KEEP WALKING.
COME ON, KEEP WALKING.
DON'T STOP.
IT'S ONLY ONE MILE AN HOUR.
Reporter: THE TEST SHOWS HOW
INEFFICIENT MY BLOOD AND OXYGEN
USE IS COMPARED TO BEN'S.
ON A QUICK LOOK-SEE,
ABOUT 66% OF WHAT BEN DID.
Reporter: I COULD HAVE
TOUGHED IT OUT LONGER,
BUT I DIDN'T WANT TO SHOW
NADIA COMANECI?
DO A JUMP.
Reporter: SHE'S NOW 37 AND
HELPING COACH FUTURE POTENTIAL
OLYMPIANS LIKE 15-YEAR-OLD
ANGELA BEAM.
BUT NADIA'S STILL FIT, SHE WORKS
OUT EVERY DAY.
BUT STILL, IT QUICKLY BECAME
CLEAR THAT BEATING ANGELA
WOULDN'T BE EASY.
THERE'S NO WAY I'M GOING
TO MAKE THIS.
TOO HARD.
HOW DO YOU KNOW?
IT'S JUST WALKING.
I JUST HAVE A GOOD VISION
OF KNOWING WHAT I CAN DO.
YOU PROBABLY WANT TO JOG NOW.
Reporter: SURE ENOUGH, EVEN
THE WINNER OF FIVE GOLD MEDALS
COULDN'T DO WHAT THE TEEN
COULD DO.
I PROBABLY WANT TO STOP NOW.
Reporter: THOUGH SHE TRIED
HARD.
YOU DIDN'T WANT TO LOSE
TO A TEENAGER?
OF COURSE NOT.
WOULD YOU?
Reporter: A TEEN'S BODY JUST
WORKS BETTER.
SHE CAN JUST PROCESS THE OXYGEN
INTO HER BODY BETTER.
RIGHT.
SHE CAN TAKE IT IN.
SHE CAN MOVE IT AROUND THE BODY
FASTER, AND SHE CAN UTILIZE IT
BETTER.
Reporter: WHEN DO WE PEAK?
WELL, FOR MEN, THE PEAKING
SEEMS TO OCCUR SOMEPLACE BETWEEN
THE AGES OF 17 TO 20,
WITHOUT ANY ADDITIONAL TRAINING.
FOR WOMEN, THAT HAPPENS EARLIER,
SOME PLACE CLOSER TO THE AGE
OF AROUND 13 TO 15.
Reporter: PEAK FOR A WOMAN IS
BY 15?
YEAH.
IT SEEMS THAT THAT'S THE POINT
WHERE MOST THINGS ARE MAXED OUT.
Reporter: AND 18, 19 FOR MEN?
FOR THE MEN.
Reporter: IT'S
OVER BY THE TIME YOU'RE 19.
IT'S OVER
AND THAT'S WHY AL HARRINGTON IS
NERVOUSLY LIFTING WEIGHTS.
PASSION IS NOT ENOUGH.
YOU SEEN THEM GUYS ON THE NBA
FLOOR?
I MEAN, THEY ARE HUGE!
THEY'RE GROPE MEN.
MOST OF 'EM, YOU KNOW, 25 AND
OLDER AND I'M ONLY 18.
Reporter: STILL AT 18,
IN MANY WAYS, WE'RE AS FULL
OF PASSION AND ENERGY AS WE'LL
EVER BE.
IT HELPS EXPLAIN WHY SOME
OF THE FIERCEST WARRIORS, LIKE
ALEXANDER THE GREAT AND JOAN
OF ARC, WERE TEENAGERS, AND WHY
MILITARY RECRUITING STARTS
AT 17.
TEENS ARE READY TO FIGHT.
HE TOOK ME IN THE BACKYARD.
IT WAS LIKE BA-BA
IN THE BACKYARD RIGHT THERE.
BOOM, BOOM, BOOM, BOOM, SHOOTIN'
OFF THE NINE.
IT WAS CHILLING.
Reporter: OF COURSE, THIS
PASSION CAN BE TURNED TO BAD
ENDS.
TEENAGERS ALSO COMMIT THREE
TIMES AS MANY CRIMES AS ADULTS.
THESE THREE IN BROOKLYN CLAIM
TO HAVE REFORMED.
I MEAN, IF WE ALL KEEP
ON FIGHTING LIKE THIS, WE'RE ALL
GOING TO BE DEAD.
Reporter: JASON SHOWED US HOW
TO CHOKE PEOPLE TILL THEY PASS
OUT SO YOU CAN STEAL
THEIR MONEY.
DOING BAD THINGS IS JUST FUN.
WHO CARES ABOUT ANYBODY?
WE'RE JUST DOING IT JUST
TO HAVE FUN.
IT WAS JUST AN ADRENALINE RUSH.
GOING OFF FOR CHASES
WITH THE POLICE.
THEY CAN'T CATCH YOU.
IT'S MAD FUN.
Reporter: KEEN IS 18.
WE USED TO JUST ROB THEM,
TAKE THEIR MONEY.
ROB ANOTHER PERSON,
AND THAT'S IT.
GET ZOOTED, GO LOOK FOR GIRLS
AND HAVE A GOOD TIME.
Reporter: DO YOU OWE SOCIETY
ANYTHING?
NOTHING.
WHAT DO I OWE THEM?
Reporter: PASSION FOR BAD,
OR GOOD.
EITHER WAY, TEENS TEND TO HAVE
MORE OF IT THAN WE ADULTS.
NOW, DON'T TAKE ME WRONG,
BUT I THINK ADULTS DON'T
ENJOY LIFE REALLY AS MUCH
AS CHILDREN DO AND THEY TAKE
LIFE FOR GRANTED.
I DON'T THINK ADULTS REALLY KNOW
WHAT TRUE PASSION IS.
Reporter: HMM.
SOME OF US ADULTS MIGHT WANT
TO ARGUE ABOUT THAT.
BUT IT IS TRUE THAT TEENS ARE
DIFFERENT, IN MANY WAYS.
HERE AGAIN, JOHN STOSSEL.
IT'S EASY TO GENERALIZE
ABOUT TEENS.
TALKING ABOUT THEM AS IF THEY'RE
ALL ALIKE, WHEN, OF COURSE,
EVERYONE'S AN INDIVIDUAL.
AND TEENS HATE BEING LABELED
A "TYPE."
THOUGH THAT IS EXACTLY WHAT
THE RESEARCHERS DO HERE,
AND THEY EARN A GOOD LIVING
DOING IT.
I HAVEN'T HEARD
OF CALVIN KLEIN IN A WHILE.
OH, YEAH, YEAH.
Reporter: AT TEEN RESEARCH
UNLIMITED, A PRIVATE MARKET
RESEARCH FIRM, THEY WATCH TEENS
FROM BEHIND ONE-WAY GLASS.
THE RESEARCHERS ARE COLLECTING
DATA FOR COMPANIES THAT WANT
TO KNOW WHAT KIDS WILL BUY.
NO!
YES!
All: NO!
Reporter: BUT THEY'LL WATCH,
WHAT MUSIC THEY LIKE, WHAT
THEY'LL WEAR --
THOSE ARE PRETTY BAGGY.
YEAH.
Reporter: AFTER 16 YEARS
OF WATCHING TEENS, THE PRESIDENT
OF RESEARCH UNLIMITED,
PETER ZOLLO, HAS COME TO SOME
CONCLUSIONS ABOUT
THEIR PERSONALITIES.
WE ACTUALLY SEGMENT TEENS
INTO FOUR DIFFERENT GROUPS.
ONE OF THE GROUPS WE CALL
INFLUENCERS, WHO ARE THOSE TEENS
WHO ARE KIND OF AT THE TOP
OF THE TEENAGE SOCIAL HIERARCHY.
**
Reporter: YOU KNOW, THE COOL
KIDS, THE IN-CROWD.
**
THE ONES MANY OF THE OTHER KIDS
IMITATE AND WANT TO JOIN.
BUT SORRY, MEMBERSHIP IS
BY INVITATION ONLY.
FOLLOWING THE INFLUENCERS,
THERE IS A GROUP WE CALL
THE CONFORMERS.
ALMOST ALL TEENAGERS, HALF
OF TEENAGERS, ARE CONFORMERS.
THEY'RE LOOKING PARTICULARLY
UPWARD TOWARDS THE INFLUENCERS
FOR WHAT TO DO, AS FAR AS BEING
THE -- DOING THE LATEST
AND GREATEST.
Reporter: AFTER
THE CONFORMERS AND
THE INFLUENCERS COMES ZOLLO'S
GROUP THREE.
HE CALLS THEM THE PASSIVES,
KIDS --
-- WHO ARE STRUGGLING
A LITTLE BIT WITH THE SOCIAL
ASPECT OF THIS LIFE STAGE.
HOWEVER, A LOT OF THESE PASSIVES
ARE HIGH ACHIEVERS IN SCHOOLS.
AND WE CERTAINLY BELIEVE A LOT
OF VERY SUCCESSFUL ADULTS CAME
FROM THIS GROUP.
THEY'RE NOT AS INVESTED
IN THE SOCIAL HIERARCHY AS ARE
OTHER TEENS.
I CAN EVEN DRESS MYSELF.
Reporter: 14-YEAR-OLD
O.J. HEIDLER MIGHT FIT THAT
CATEGORY.
O.J. LIVES ON THIS SMALL FARM
IN SOUTH DAKOTA.
HE SAYS WHEN HE GOES OFF TO HIGH
SCHOOL LATER THIS YEAR, HE'S
STILL GOING TO WEAR HIS COWBOY
BOOTS NO MATTER WHAT ANYBODY
SAYS.
I'VE WORE 'EM FOR 14 YEARS
OF MY LIFE.
I SURE AIN'T GONNA CHANGE
BECAUSE SOMEBODY ELSE SAYS,
"BOY, THAT LOOKS DUMB."
I DON'T CARE.
Reporter: OF COURSE, WHILE
THE IN CROWD INFLUENCES,
THEY RARELY START THE FADS.
**
THE NEW IDEAS GENERALLY COME
FROM TEENAGE CATEGORY FOUR, WHAT
ZOLLO CALLS THE EDGE KIDS,
AS IN CUTTING EDGE.
THE TEENS THEMSELVES MAY CALL
THEMSELVES PUNKS, OR GOTHS,
OR SURFERS OR SKATERS, DEPENDING
WHERE THEY ARE.
THESE ARE THE MOST REBELLIOUS
KIDS, TEENS LIKE AURA, WHO SET
THE TRENDS.
NOT ALL THEIR TRENDS ARE
FOLLOWED.
AND, OF COURSE, TEENS DON'T
ALWAYS FALL INTO NEAT
CATEGORIES.
SOME OF THE TEENS TAKING PART
IN THE CHICAGO FOCUS GROUP FELT
ONE OF THEM, DEE, WAS WHAT ZOLLO
WOULD CALL AN INFLUENCER.
SHE'S SO LAID BACK!
I REALLY ADMIRE
HER FOR THE WAY SHE'S LAID BACK.
SHE LOOKS SO PUT TOGETHER.
Reporter: BUT THEN DEE
REVEALED SOMETHING THAT MIGHT
PUT HER IN THE EDGE CATEGORY.
OH, A TONGUE RING.
OH, THAT'S SO COOL!
THAT'S SO COOL.
Reporter: WHAT'S THIS ABOUT?
I MEAN, YOU'RE POKING A HOLE
IN YOUR CHIN.
YOUR HAIR IS, I DON'T KNOW WHAT.
RIGHT.
Reporter: RED.
PINK.
Reporter: PINK?
YOU GOT STICKS IN YOUR HAIR.
WHAT FOR?
BECAUSE I LIKE IT.
IT'S FUN.
DOESN'T IT MAKE YOU LIKE
SOMEWHAT HAPPY TO LIKE SEE THAT,
INSTEAD OF JUST LIKE THE SAME
OLD THING YOU SEE EVERY SINGLE
DAY, WALKING DOWN THE STREET.
ALL BLACK, ROBOTIC, BLAH, BLAH,
BLAH, BLAH, BLAH.
I MEAN, THAT'S SO, LIKE,
COMMUNIST.
Reporter: SOMETIMES TEENS
SEEM LIKE PEACOCKS, SHOWING
THEIR FEATHERS, TRYING
TO ATTRACT ATTENTION.
OR CHAMELEONS, WHO KEEP
EXPERIMENTING WITH DIFFERENT
IDENTITIES, SEARCHING FOR ONE
THAT FITS.
THIS IS NATURAL, SAY
PSYCHOLOGISTS, ADOLESCENTS NEED
TO DISTANCE THEMSELVES
FROM THEIR PARENTS
AND THEIR PARENTS' CUSTOMS.
AS CHILDREN, THEY WERE
SO ATTACHED.
NOW, IF THEY'RE TO BECOME
HEALTHY ADULTS, THEY MUST PUSH
AWAY.
AREN'T YOU TRYING TO STICK IT
TO US OLD FOLK?
STICK IT HOW?
Reporter: SAY, "LOOK, I DON'T
HAVE TO BE LIKE YOU."
NO, NOT -- COME ON, JOHN.
WHEN YOU WERE YOUNG, YOU --
YOU WEREN'T LIKE SOME HIPPIE
KID, WITH LIKE LONG HAIR?
Reporter: I DIDN'T STICK
ANY --
AND GOT THROWN OUT OF SCHOOL
BECAUSE YOU LIKE WORE THE WRONG
CLOTHES OR SOMETHING?
COME ON.
**
Reporter: OKAY, SHE HAS
A POINT.
I GREW UP IN THE '60s.
WE DID LOTS OF THINGS THAT
BUGGED OUR PARENTS.
BEFORE THAT, THERE WAS GOLDFISH
SWALLOWING AND CRAMMING PHONE
BOOTHS.
IT'S ALL PART OF THE RITE
OF PASSAGE, THAT NEED TO TRY OUT
NEW PERSONALITIES.
IF IT APPALLS YOUR PARENTS,
SO MUCH THE BETTER, BECAUSE THAT
PROVES YOU'RE BECOMING
AN INDIVIDUAL.
WHEN WE COME BACK, SCIENCE SHEDS
SOME LIGHT ON TEEN BEHAVIOR.
WE LOOK INSIDE A TEENAGE BRAIN.
WHY ARE SO MANY TEENAGERS
SO WEIRD?
IT'S A COMMON COMPLAINT WE HEAR.
THE WAY THEY LOOK, THE WAY
THEY ACT.
WHAT IT'S ABOUT, SAY
PSYCHOLOGISTS, IS A NECESSARY
BREAKING AWAY FROM US PARENTS,
A SEPARATION THAT HAS TO HAPPEN
DURING ADOLESCENCE IF THE TEEN
IS TO BECOME AN INDEPENDENT
ADULT.
IT'S NO LONGER ENOUGH FOR US
TO TELL THEM THE STOVE IS HOT.
NOW, THEY HAVE TO TOUCH IT
TO DECIDE FOR THEMSELVES.
HI, MOM.
I'M SMOKING.
Reporter: WE PARENTS DON'T
LIKE THAT, BECAUSE
IN THEIR PURSUIT OF
INDIVIDUALITY, MANY TEENS, NOT
JUST THE EDGE KIDS, DO CRAZY
THINGS.
**
THEIR MUSIC IS, WELL, DIFFERENT.
AND SOME DON'T JUST LISTEN,
THEY TURN CONCERTS INTO CONTACT
SPORTS.
A FEW ARE DYEING THEIR HAIR,
PIERCING THEIR TONGUES.
THEY HAVE TO LOOK DIFFERENT,
UNLESS THEY HAVE TO LOOK ALIKE.
BUT THE BIGGEST WORRIES FOR MANY
PARENTS ARE SEXUAL
EXPERIMENTATION.
BY THE END OF HIGH SCHOOL,
ABOUT HALF THE TEENS SAY THEY'VE
HAD SEX AND THE PHYSICAL
RISKTAKING --
HANG ON THERE.
Reporter: O.J. HEIDLER RIDES
BULLS AND ROPES STEER.
IT'S A TEEN BOY THING.
THE APPARENT RECKLESSNESS,
DISREGARD FOR PERSONAL SAFETY.
TO ADULTS IT SEEMS AS IF THEY'RE
NOT JUST DEFYING THE LAWS
OF GRAVITY, BUT COMMON SENSE
AS WELL.
**
IT'S SOMETHING 17-YEAR-OLD
ALI ZANDI IS KIND OF PROUD OF.
I'M JUST A CRAZY NUT, A CRAZY
GUY JUST RUNNING AROUND BREAKING
THINGS.
Reporter: HIS LITTLE BROTHER
CAN'T FIGURE HIM OUT.
HE'S LIKE WEIRD.
HE LISTENS TO CRAZY MUSIC.
HE HAS ALL THESE TATTOOS.
I'VE GOT THIS DRAGON RIGHT
HERE, A SKULL, ANOTHER SKULL
OVER HERE.
Reporter: WHY WOULD HE SHOW
HIS INDEPENDENCE BY GETTING
PERMANENT TATTOOS?
WELL, THOSE HARVARD RESEARCHERS
WHO DO THE BRAIN SCANS SAY THAT
NOT ONLY ARE TEENS MORE LIKELY
TO USE THE PART OF THE BRAIN
THAT MAY ALLOW FOR MORE
CREATIVITY, THEY'RE ALSO LESS
LIKELY TO USE THE PART THAT DOES
CRITICAL THINKING.
THAT'S YOUR BRAIN THERE.
Reporter: THAT HELPS PEOPLE
MAKE MATURE JUDGMENTS.
TEENS USE THE GUT REACTION PART
OF THE BRAIN.
SO THEY'RE USING THE MORE
EMOTIONAL, AUTOMATIC PARTS.
MM-HMM.
Reporter: WE SMARTER ADULTS
USE OUR CRITICAL THINKING.
THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT.
YOU ACTIVATED MORE UP IN THIS
REGION.
AND THE BOYS THAT WE SAW TODAY
ACTIVATED MORE DOWN IN THIS
REGION.
Reporter: SO THERE'S A REASON
FOR US TO WORRY ABOUT THEM?
YES, I THINK SO.
Reporter: THE BOYS SHE WAS
TALKING ABOUT INCLUDE THE TEENS
SHE REGULARLY TESTS, AND NOW
ALSO O.J.
WE FLEW HIM IN FROM SOUTH DAKOTA
SO HE COULD TAKE THE TEST.
OKAY.
YOU'RE DOING A SUPER JOB.
THE IMAGES LOOK GREAT.
Reporter: AS PART
OF THE TEST, AFTER YOU'RE LOADED
INTO THE MACHINE, THEY HAVE
YOU LOOK THROUGH A MIRROR
AT PICTURES OF FACES.
THEN THEY ASK YOU --
FIGURE OUT THE EXPRESSION
THAT THESE FACES ARE MAKING
AND I'LL ASK YOU ABOUT THEM WHEN
YOU COME OUT OF THE MACHINE,
OKAY?
Reporter: WHAT IS
THE EXPRESSION ON THE FACE?
THEN THEY WATCH WHICH PART
OF OUR BRAINS WE USE WHILE
THINKING ABOUT THAT.
LATER THEY TEST US FURTHER
WITH THE SAME FACES.
SHOCKED.
ANGRY.
SAD.
HAPPY.
WHAT THEY'VE FOUND IS THAT
TEENS, ESPECIALLY THE YOUNGER
ONES, JUST DON'T SEE THINGS THAT
ARE OBVIOUS TO US ADULTS.
NOT SURPRISED?
NO.
Reporter: THIS MAN LOOKS
SHOCKED, ANGUISHED.
BUT O.J. DOESN'T SEE IT.
I DON'T THINK THEY HAVE
A WORD FOR THAT EXPRESSION.
Reporter: YOU DON'T THINK
HE'S SHOCKED?
NO.
Reporter: HE DIDN'T THINK
THIS WOMAN LOOKED UPSET.
YOU DON'T THINK SHE LOOKS SAD?
SOMETHING BAD JUST HAPPENED?
NOT THAT BAD, NO.
Reporter: YURGELUN-TODD SAYS
THIS HELPS EXPLAIN WHY TEENS
OFTEN EXERCISE BAD JUDGMENT.
THEY JUST DON'T SEE WHAT WE SEE.
THEY MAY NOT REALIZE
THE TEACHER'S MAD OR THAT
THEIR GIRLFRIEND'S HURT.
THEIR BRAINS AREN'T ADULT
OR MATURE AND THEY DON'T YET
HAVE THE WHEREWITHAL TO DO
EVERYTHING WE EXPECT THEM TO DO.
Reporter: DO YOU THINK THAT
KIDS YOUR AGE THINK DIFFERENTLY
FROM PEOPLE MY AGE?
OH, I HOPE SO.
Reporter: YOU HOPE.
THAT WOULD BE ONE BIG SCREWED
OFF GROUP IF THAT WAS IT.
Reporter: THAT'S INSIGHTFUL.
HE UNDERSTANDS THAT TEENS STILL
NEED GUIDANCE FROM PARENTS.
AND HERE THERE'S SOME GOOD
NEWS --
WHAT'S CERTAINLY DIFFERENT
ABOUT THESE TEEN GENERATION IS
THEY ARE REALLY FEELING
A CLOSENESS TO THEIR PARENTS,
MORE SO THAN WE'VE SEEN
IN THE PREVIOUS COUPLE
OF DECADES.
WHAT WOULD YOU SAY ARE
THE PEOPLE IN YOUR LIVES THAT
ARE LIKE, ARE THE MOST IMPORTANT
TO YOU?
MY PARENTS.
BOTH MY PARENTS.
MOSTLY MY FATHER.
WHY'S THAT?
I DON'T KNOW.
BECAUSE OF HIS INFLUENCE ON ME.
MY MOM DID A TERRIFIC JOB.
I REALLY APPRECIATE
MY PARENTS.
PARENTS ARE REALLY IMPORTANT
JUST TO GUIDE YOU AND TELL
YOU WHAT'S RIGHT AND WRONG.
Reporter: OH, SO THEY DO
NEED US.
BUT THEN WHY DO SO MANY PARENTS
COMPLAIN ABOUT SCREAMING FIGHTS
OR SILENCES AND SLAMMED DOORS?
IF TEENS REALLY WANT PARENTS
INVOLVED IN THEIR LIVES, MANY
ARE HIDING IT WELL.
"WHEN THEY WERE 10,
THEY OBEYED."
"NOW, HE WON'T LISTEN."
"HE DOESN'T EVEN SEEM
TO LIKE ME."
"IF I TRY TO HELP HER, SHE GOES
TO HER ROOM AND SLAMS THE DOOR."
THESE ARE THE KINDS OF THINGS
PARENTS OF TEENS SAY.
BEWILDERED BY WHAT SEEMS LIKE
A PERSONALITY CHANGE
IN THE CHILDREN THEY ONCE KNEW
SO WELL.
WHAT CAN A PARENT DO?
WE HAVE GOT TO ACCEPT
THE FACT THAT ONCE A KID HITS
ADOLESCENCE, THE WHOLE GAME
CHANGES.
Reporter: FAMILY THERAPIST
MIRA KIRSHENBAUM AND
HER HUSBAND, DR. CHARLES FOSTER,
HAVE SPENT YEARS STUDYING
ADOLESCENTS.
FOR 12 YEARS, BASICALLY,
THE KIDS LISTENED.
NOW, SUDDENLY, THEY HAVE
TO REBEL?
THEY HAVE TO REBEL?
WHY PUT IT IN TERMS
OF REBELLION?
WHY NOT PUT IT IN TERMS
OF A TRANSITION FROM LISTENING
TO YOU, THE PARENT, TO LISTENING
TO HIMSELF, AS THE ADULT?
* LET'S TALK ABOUT SEX,
BABY *
* LET'S TALK ABOUT SEX *
Reporter: BECAUSE THEY DON'T
ACT LIKE ADULTS!
PICK HER UP.
PICK HER UP!
Reporter: THEY DO FOOLISH
THINGS, SOMETIMES RISKY THINGS,
AND THEN THEY LIE ABOUT IT.
92% OF THE HIGH SCHOOLERS SAY
THEY LIE TO THEIR PARENTS.
[ GROUP LAUGHS ]
I LIE ALL THE TIME.
IT DOESN'T MATTER IF IT'S
TO MY MOM OR TO A TEACHER.
YOU LIE TO GET YOUR ASS
OUT OF TROUBLE.
Reporter: DO ANY OF YOU NOT
LIE TO YOUR PARENTS?
WHY WOULD ANY OF US LIE
TO ANYBODY?
BECAUSE WE'RE AFRAID WE'RE GOING
TO GET INTO TROUBLE WHEN WE TELL
THE TRUTH.
I JUST -- I DON'T TRUST THAT
YOU'RE GOING TO TELL ME
THE TRUTH.
I DON'T TRUST THAT YOU TELL ME
THAT YOU'RE GOING TO GO
SOMEWHERE AND THAT YOU'RE GOING
TO BE THERE.
Reporter: LORI BLOOM OF BATH,
MAINE, KNOWS HER DAUGHTER,
ASHLEY, LIES TO HER.
THIS TIME, ASHLEY HAD HIDDEN
A BAD TEST RESULT.
ALL THAT WE ASK IS THAT
YOU TELL -- TELL THE TRUTH.
I FORGOT.
I'M SORRY.
I DON'T THINK YOU FORGOT.
Reporter: ASHLEY SAYS
SHE AND HER FRIENDS HAVE TO LIE
BECAUSE PARENTS GO CRAZY
IF THEY TELL THEM THE TRUTH.
THAT TERRIFIES US.
WE DON'T WHAT THEY'RE -- HOW
THEY'RE GONNA REACT, WHAT
THEY'RE -- IF THEY'RE GONNA
SCREAM, IF THEY'RE GONNA CRY.
IF THEY'RE JUST GOING TO STORM
OFF AND SAY, "GET OUT
OF THE HOUSE.
I DON'T WANT TO SEE
YOU RIGHT NOW."
I DIDN'T WANT TO TALK.
YOU WITHHELD INFORMATION.
MM-HMM.
FOR FEAR YOU WOULD GET
IN TROUBLE.
MM-HMM.
Reporter: IN IOWA,
CINDY HENTSCHEL TAKES
14-YEAR-OLD DAWN TO A FAMILY
THERAPIST BECAUSE, SHE SAYS,
DAWN LIES TO HER.
AND WHILE WE WERE TAPING, DAWN
SURPRISED HER MOM BY ADMITTING
THAT FOR MORE THAN A YEAR SHE'S
BEEN LYING TO HER ABOUT SMOKING
CIGARETTES.
YOU'RE GONNA BECOME
A DISAPPOINTMENT TO ME, BUT I'VE
BEEN SMOKING SINCE I WAS
IN SEVENTH GRADE.
AND YOU TOLD ME YOU QUIT.
MM-HMM.
WELL, SHE'S NOT GONNA GET ANY
FREE TIME FOR A WHILE.
WHAT'S THAT MEAN?
NO TIME TO GO RUN
WITH HER FRIENDS, TO GO
TO THE MALL, LIKE SHE KEEPS
ASKING TO DO.
SHE WAS SUPPOSED TO GET MONEY
TOMORROW.
SO I'M NOT GETTING THE MONEY
TOMORROW?
NOPE.
LOTS OF PARENTS MAKE
THEIR KIDS SORRY THEY OPENED
THEIR MOUTHS WHEN THEY TALK
TO THEM.
AND THOSE ARE THE KIDS WHO LIE.
**
MATT, MATT, COME HERE.
Reporter: MANY FAMILY
THERAPISTS SAY THE MORE RULES
YOU HAVE, THE MORE YOU GET
LIED TO.
IF I SAY I'M GOING
TO SOMEONE'S HOUSE, YOU DON'T
BELIEVE ME.
BECAUSE YOU DON'T.
BECAUSE YOU'VE LIED TO ME
SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
Reporter: FRANCINE WENZEL HAS
LOTS OF RULES FOR 15-YEAR-OLD
MATT, LIKE A 9:30 CURFEW
ON WEEKENDS.
CURFEW IS A PRIVILEGE WHICH
YOU DON'T DESERVE, PERIOD.
9:30 AND I'M 15.
COME ON NOW.
WHAT TIME DO YOU WANT
IT TO BE?
PEOPLE, MOM -- PEOPLE DON'T
GO OUT TILL 8:30.
YOU'RE STILL CHILDREN.
THERE ARE CRAZY PEOPLE OUT
THERE.
YOU KNOW THIS.
BUT I FORGOT, YOU'RE
JESUS CHRIST.
NOTHING HAPPENS TO YOU, RIGHT?
YOU'RE INVINCIBLE, RIGHT?
SHE SAYS, "YOU DON'T MAKE
GOOD DECISIONS.
YOU DON'T HAVE GOOD JUDGMENT.
YOU'RE A CHILD.
YOU'RE A MESS."
THE OLDER YOU GET, THE MORE
RESPONSIBILITIES YOU GET,
THE MORE MATURE YOU GET.
BUT YOU CAN'T SPELL THAT WORD.
KEEP RIPPIN' ME.
I'M NOT TRYING TO RIP YOU.
WELL, SHE MIGHT AS WELL JUST
BUILD A FIRE AND THEN POUR
GASOLINE ON IT.
BECAUSE SHE'S SAYING, "I DON'T
CARE WHAT YOU SAY.
YOU'RE JUST A KID."
IT'S THAT ATTITUDE WHICH IS
PERFECTLY APPROPRIATE
TO A 5-YEAR-OLD, MEANS THAT
SHE'S STRUGGLING NOW THAT
HER KID IS 15.
SHE SHOULD BE SAYING TO HIM, "I
KNOW YOU'RE NOT A KID ANYMORE."
YOU'RE MY BABY.
AND YOU'RE 14.
Reporter: LORI'S AWARE THAT
SHE INSTINCTIVELY TREATS
HER YOUNG ADULT LIKE SHE'S STILL
A CHILD.
I THINK PARENTS SHOULD JUST
UNDERSTAND THAT WE WANT TO GROW
UP AND BE OUR OWN PEOPLE.
TO HAVE A SELF, TO KNOW WHO
YOU ARE IS AN ENORMOUS TASK.
AND IN THE 5,000 DAYS
OF ADOLESCENCE, EVERY TEENAGER
IS TRYING TO LEAVE HOME.
AND THE ONLY WAY SHE CAN LEAVE
HOME IS IF SHE ACCOMPLISHES
THAT.
BUT IF YOU'RE GOING TO TRY
TO CONTROL HER, THEN YOU'RE
MAKING IT A BATTLE BETWEEN
LISTENING TO YOU OR LISTENING
TO HERSELF.
WHY IS IT EVRY TIME YOU ASK
ME A QUESTION AND I TELL YOU NO,
YOU GOTTA ASK ME WHY?
BECAUSE I WANT TO KNOW WHY.
THE REASON IS BECAUSE
I SAID NO.
Reporter: "BECAUSE I SAID NO"
WAS A GOOD ENOUGH ANSWER WHEN
YOUR CHILD WAS 5.
BUT NOT FOR TEENS, WHO SHOULD
NOW BE LEARNING HOW TO MAKE
THEIR OWN DECISIONS.
WHAT ABOUT DATING?
NOPE.
Reporter: CINDY TELLS
THE FAMILY THERAPIST WHY SHE HAS
STRICT RULES FOR DAWN -- RULES
LIKE FORBIDDING HER TO DATE.
BECAUSE I FOUND OUT THAT
SHE HAD BEEN SEXUALLY ACTIVE
AND I DIDN'T REALIZE IT.
AND SHE CAN'T STOP
YOU FROM BEING SEXUALLY ACTIVE,
CAN SHE?
UH-UH.
BASICALLY, I REALLY CAN'T
STOP HER FROM DOING ANYTHING.
Reporter: PARENTS TRY TO USE
RULES TO PROTECT THEIR KIDS.
BUT PARENTS OF TEENS HAVE
A PROBLEM BECAUSE YOU'RE NOT
WITH YOUR TEENAGER ALL THE TIME.
YEAH!
85% OF THE TIME, KIDS ARE
ALONE OR WITH THEIR FRIENDS.
Reporter: YOU BOTH ARGUE THAT
WE SHOULD HAVE FEWER RULES.
ABSOLUTELY.
WHY WOULD YOU HAVE A RULE THAT
YOU CAN'T ENFORCE, YOU CAN'T
POLICE AND YOU CAN'T MONITOR?
Reporter: BUT MY KID SHOULD
LISTEN TO ME.
I SHOULD TELL HIM WHAT TO DO
UNTIL HE'S AN ADULT.
WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO DO?
TELL HIM WHAT TO DO UNTIL HE'S
WHEN, 25?
35?
AND THEN WHAT?
THIS IS A HUMAN BEING WHO HAS
NOT LEARNED TO LISTEN
TO HIMSELF.
WHAT IS HE GOING TO DO?
IF YOU'VE BEEN CONTROLLING
YOUR KID, THEN YOU HAVE CREATED
SOMEONE WHO DOESN'T KNOW HOW
TO NAVIGATE.
IF WE'RE NOT ALLOWED TO MAKE
OUR OWN CHOICES, MAYBE
IN THE FUTURE WE'RE NEVER GOING
TO BE ABLE TO.
Reporter: SO YOU HAVE TO LET
YOUR 14-YEAR-OLD DAUGHTER DATE?
AND WHAT IF SHE COMES HOME --
WITH A GUY WHOSE TONGUE IS
PIERCED AND HAS SOMETHING GROSS
PRINTED ON HIS T-SHIRT?
YOU SAY, "WELCOME, KIDS"?
IF YOU'RE A SMART PARENT,
WHEN SHE COMES HOME WITH THIS
GUY WITH THE DISGUSTING MESSAGE
ON HIS T-SHIRT AND HIS TONGUE IS
PIERCED AND HE HAS AN ARROW
THROUGH HIS HEAD OR WHATEVER,
YOU SAY, "HEY, SCAR, WELCOME
TO OUR FAMILY."
BECAUSE THE FACT IS, IN SPITE
OF THE WAY HE LOOKS, YOU DON'T
KNOW THE TRUTH ABOUT SCAR.
Reporter: WELL, I DO.
I DON'T LIKE THIS KID
IN MY HOUSE.
AND THEN SHE'S GONNA SAY,
"BUT YOU DON'T KNOW HIM."
AND THEN YOU'RE GONNA SAY, "WELL
I DON'T WANT TO KNOW HIM
BECAUSE OF THE WAY HE LOOKS."
AND THEN SHE'S GONNA SAY, "WELL,
YOU'RE CLOSE-MINDED."
YOU'RE SETTING UP A ROMEO
AND JULIET SCENARIO,
BECAUSE THEN SHE GOES
UNDERGROUND WITH IT
AND SHE FALLS MORE AND MORE
DEEPLY INVOLVED WITH HIM.
YOU ARE GOING TO CLEAN
YOUR ROOM!
NO, I'M NOT.
YES, YOU ARE!
Reporter: NOW, TEENS DO NEED
RULES.
CLEANING HER ROOM IS ONE
HER MOTHER CAN POLICE.
BUT THE EXPERTS SAY FIGHTING
OVER SUCH SMALL STUFF ISN'T
WORTH IT.
INSTEAD, FOCUS ON A FEW
IMPORTANT RULES --
SAY, DON'T DRIVE DRUNK, CALL
WHEN YOU'RE LATE, DON'T CHEAT.
WHATEVER'S IMPORTANT TO YOU.
AFTER THAT, GET OFF YOUR KID'S
BACK.
IT'S NOT A PROBLEM THAT
YOU HAVE VALUES.
YOUR VALUES ARE GOOD AND IT'S
GOOD THAT YOU COMMUNICATE
YOUR VALUES.
THE PROBLEM ENTERS WHEN YOU HAVE
A BUNCH OF LITTLE RULES THAT
POISON YOUR RELATIONSHIP
WITH YOUR TEENAGER.
DAWN!
SO YOUR KID GETS SO FED UP
DEALING WITH YOU, SHE JUST
WRITES YOU OUT.
DAWN!
I'M COMING!
WHEN?
NEXT YEAR?
YOU EVER FEEL LIKE YOU'RE
JUST POLICING, DETECTING?
CONSTANTLY.
BECAUSE I CAN'T TRUST HER.
WELL, HOW DO YOU REACT
TO THAT?
REBELS.
I PULL AWAY.
LIKE HOW?
I DON'T TELL HER ANYTHING.
I DON'T DO WHAT I'M SUPPOSED
TO DO.
I RUN AWAY.
DO WHATEVER I FEEL LIKE,
WHENEVER I FEEL LIKE IT.
TEENAGERS, THAT'S THE ESSENCE
OF ADOLESCENCE.
THEY HAVE AN ALLERGIC REACTION
TO ANY ATTEMPT TO CONTROL THEM.
THEY HATE IT, THEY SMELL IT,
AND THEY RUN AWAY FROM IT.
SO WHAT DO WE DO ABOUT IT?
WE'LL LOOK
BY THE TIME OUR KIDS ARE
TEENS, SOME OF US PARENTS FEEL
AS IF WE NO LONGER HAVE MUCH
INFLUENCE, THAT THE ONLY PEOPLE
OUR KIDS WILL REALLY LISTEN
TO ARE THEIR PEERS.
YOU MAKE YOUR FRIENDS MORE
IMPORTANT THAN ANYTHING ELSE
IN YOUR LIFE.
WELL, WHEN I NEED THEM,
THEY'RE THERE FOR ME MORE THAN
ANYTHING IN MY LIFE.
OH, NOBODY ELSE DOES NOTHING
FOR YOU, RIGHT?
HELL, NO.
WHAT'S UP, YO.
MAD LOVE.
Reporter: 15-YEAR-OLD MATT
CAN'T WAIT TO GET OUT
OF THE HOUSE SO HE CAN BE
WITH HIS FRIENDS.
HE SAYS HIS FRIENDS ARE THERE
FOR HIM.
THEY ARE!
THAT'S WHAT YOU GET
FROM FRIENDS.
YOU FEEL LIKE YOU BELONG.
IF HE CAN'T GET IT AT HOME,
HIS FRIENDS WILL BECOME MORE
AND MORE IMPORTANT TO HIM.
THE FRIENDS LISTEN TO YOU.
WHAT YOU SAY IS OKAY.
Reporter: MATT AGREES THAT
HIS FRIENDS REALLY PAY
ATTENTION.
MOM DOESN'T.
SHE DOESN'T LISTEN
TO ANYTHING I HAVE TO SAY.
SHE HAS NO TIME TO BE LISTENING
TO ME.
IF YOU WERE HOME MORE OFTEN,
YOU COULD SIT AND TALK TO ME.
ONE NIGHT A WEEK, I DON'T WORK,
SATURDAY NIGHT.
WHY DON'T YOU JUST TRY TO STAY
HOME?
YEAH, RIGHT, SATURDAY NIGHT.
NOW, YOU REALLY -- NOW, YOU'RE
SMOKING CRACK.
SHE WANTS TO SPEND MORE TIME
WITH HIM.
PLEASE!
ONE NIGHT A WEEK.
AND SHE CAN'T GET HIM TO DO IT.
WELL, OF COURSE NOT.
WHAT DO THEY DO WHEN THEY SPEND
TIME TOGETHER?
THEY FIGHT!
YOU KNOW WHAT I HAVE TO PUT
UP THROUGH?
MY NERVES ARE SHOT.
I'M GONNA EXPLODE ONE DAY
IF I DON'T GET AWAY.
WHERE ARE YOU GOING?
I'M LEAVING!
HE'S A REALLY GOOD KID.
HE WANTS TO WORK IT OUT
WITH HER.
HE DOESN'T KNOW HOW.
Reporter: THE FIRST THING
TO DO, SAY THE EXPERTS, IS
FOR PARENTS TO LECTURE LESS.
WHEN I SAY, "I KNOW, DAD,
I KNOW."
HE SAYS, "YOU THINK YOU KNOW
BUT YOU DON'T KNOW.
YOU DON'T KNOW!"
AND I'M LIKE, "BUT DAD, I --
I KNOW."
HE SAYS, "NO, YOU DON'T KNOW.
'CAUSE IF YOU KNEW, YOU WOULDN'T
HAVE DONE IT!"
YOU KNOW, I'M REALLY MORE
AFRAID OF BEING LECTURED THAN
BEING PUNISHED, BECAUSE IT'S
JUST REALLY REDUNDANT
AND TEDIOUS AND ALL.
ASK YOURSELF AS A PARENT, WHY
DON'T YOU LISTEN TO PEOPLE?
WELL, YOU DON'T LISTEN
TO SOMEONE FOR ONE REASON,
BECAUSE THEY TELL YOU THE SAME
THING OVER AND OVER AND OVER.
YOU'VE HEARD IT 20 TIMES.
WHY WOULD YOU LISTEN TO IT
THE 21st TIME?
DOES, LIKE, LECTURING JUST
COME NATURALLY NOW THAT YOU'RE
A PARENT, YOU LIKE TO LECTURE?
Reporter: I THINK I KNOW MORE
THAN YOU.
YOU'RE A KID.
AS KIDS, WE THINK WE KNOW
MORE THAN YOU.
Reporter: BUT YOU DON'T.
BUT WE DON'T.
BUT BY YOU TELLING US WHAT WE DO
AND DON'T KNOW ISN'T GONNA
HELP US.
Reporter: IT ISN'T GOING
TO HELP THEM FORM THEIR OWN
IDENTITIES.
AND IT MAY PUSH THEM AWAY.
INSTEAD OF MAKING THIS POCKET
FLAT --
Reporter: AURA'S PARENTS
PUSHED HER AWAY BY ATTACKING
THE VERY THING THAT TURNED OUT
TO MAKE HER SUCCESSFUL.
MY PARENTS HATED THE WAY
I DRESSED, HATED IT.
Reporter: WHAT DID THEY SAY?
THEY HATED THE MAKEUP.
THEY HATED LIKE THE CRAZY
HAIRSTYLES.
Reporter: THE RESULT?
SHE MOVED IN WITH HER BOYFRIEND.
MIRA KIRSHENBAUM SAYS RATHER
THAN LECTURE YOUR TEEN --
ASK QUESTIONS.
LISTEN, LISTEN, LISTEN.
Reporter: WELL, I'M
THE PARENT, WHAT CAN
SHE TELL ME?
I'M SUPPOSED TO TEACH HER.
WHY SHOULD SHE LISTEN TO YOU?
YOU HAVEN'T EARNED THE RIGHT.
Reporter: WHAT DO YOU MEAN,
EARN IT?
I'M HER PARENT.
I DON'T HAVE TO EARN IT.
IF YOU ASK HER THE QUESTIONS
ABOUT HOW SHE FELT AND WHY
SHE DID IT AND WHAT IT MEANT,
SHE'S GOING TO FEEL THAT YOU ARE
A SAFE PERSON TO TELL THINGS TO.
THEN YOU CAN SAY, "CAN I TELL
YOU HOW I FEEL?"
WELL, YOU -- FIRST OF ALL,
YOU'VE EARNED THE RIGHT NOW
TO TALK ABOUT HOW YOU FEEL
BECAUSE SHE'S OPENED UP.
AND THAT'S HOW PARENTS WHO
REALLY DO HAVE INFLUENCE
WITH THEIR KIDS GET INFLUENCE,
IS BY LISTENING TO
THEIR TEENAGERS TALK FIRST.
WHY DID I DO IT?
BECAUSE I REALLY DIDN'T WANT
TO GO TO SCHOOL.
Reporter: THEN YOU CAN SAY
WHAT YOU WOULD DO, WHAT
YOUR VALUES ARE.
WHERE ARE YOU GOING TO GET
WITHOUT SCHOOL?
NOWHERE.
Reporter: THE TEENS MAY NOT
ACT LIKE THEY HEAR IT,
BUT THE EXPERTS SAY THEY DO,
AND IT WILL MAKE A DIFFERENCE
LATER.
AFTER ALL, SURVEYS SHOW MOST
YOUNG ADULTS EVENTUALLY DO ADOPT
THEIR PARENTS' VALUES.
YOU JUST CAN'T FORCE IT.
ON THE OTHER HAND, WHILE BEING
VERY STRICT, TOO CONTROLLING,
CAUSES PROBLEMS, THE OPPOSITE
CAUSES PROBLEMS, TOO.
REMEMBER BEN MULLIGAN,
THE 18-YEAR-OLD WHO BEAT ME
ON THE AEROBIC TEST?
WE FIRST MET HIM HERE IN MAINE,
AT THE HYDE SCHOOL, A SCHOOL
THAT SPECIALIZES IN HELPING
TEENAGERS WHO ARE HAVING
PROBLEMS.
BEN'S PARENTS BROUGHT HIM HERE
BECAUSE HE'D BEEN GETTING STONED
AND HIS GRADES HAD FALLEN.
BEN WAS EXTREMELY UNHAPPY
AND HE WAS VERY REBELLIOUS.
LIKE A LOT OF DRINKING
OVER THAT SUMMER, SMOKED A LOT
OF POT.
YOU KNOW, MY FAULT IN THAT
WAS I DISENGAGED.
Reporter: BEN'S FATHER FEARED
THE TRUTH, SO HE DIDN'T ASK.
I MEAN, I WOULDN'T ASK THOSE
HARD QUESTIONS, EVER.
I BECAME LAZY.
ABDICATING JUST BASICALLY
SAYS TO YOUR KID, "YOU KNOW,
I DON'T CARE."
AND THAT'S TERRIBLE.
ONE OF THE MARKS OF A REALLY
GOOD PARENT IS THAT YOU ASK
QUESTIONS THAT GET BAD NEWS.
IF YOU'RE NOT HEARING BAD NEWS,
YOUR KID'S NOT TELLING
YOU THE WHOLE TRUTH.
Reporter: BUT HOW MUCH
INFLUENCE DO WE HAVE OVER THESE
KIDS ANYWAY?
YOU HAVE AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT
OF INFLUENCE FOR A COUPLE
OF REASONS.
DEEP DOWN YOUR KID IS FEELING
UNLOVED AND SCARED.
I'VE ALWAYS BEEN SO SCARED
OF, YOU KNOW, WHAT AM I GONNA DO
WITH MY LIFE?
I REALLY WISH I WAS, LIKE,
A LOT CLOSER WITH MY DAD
ESPECIALLY, BECAUSE HE, LIKE,
GETS HOME FROM WORK AT, LIKE,
5:00 OR 6:00 AND THEN HE GOES
INTO HIS, LIKE, ROOM AND WATCHES
BASKETBALL AND FOOTBALL
OR WHATEVER SEASON IT IS.
Reporter: IS THE MOST
IMPORTANT RELATIONSHIP YOU HAVE
IN YOUR LIFE WITH YOUR PARENTS?
YES?
TEENAGERS MAY NOT SHOW IT,
BUT THEY DO WANT QUESTIONS,
INTEREST, LIMITS.
IT MAKES THEM FEEL SAFE
AND LOVED.
YOU KNOW, SOMETIMES I WISH
THAT THEY WOULD BE MORE STRICT,
LIKE, YOU KNOW, SET A LITTLE
MORE RULES.
I KNOW I'M GOING TO REGRET THIS
IN TWO MONTHS, BUT STILL --
Reporter: I WAS SURPRISED HOW
MANY TEENS TOLD ME THEY LIKED IT
WHEN THEIR PARENTS SET LIMITS.
WHY WOULD YOU WANT THEM TO BE
MORE STRICT?
THAT WOULD TAKE AWAY
YOUR FREEDOM.
BECAUSE IF THEY'RE MORE
STRICT, THEN, LIKE,
THEY PARTICIPATE MORE
IN MY LIFE.
Reporter: AND PARTICIPATION
ISN'T JUST SETTING LIMITS.
ONE TRICK, SAY THE EXPERTS, IS
CATCH YOUR CHILD DOING SOMETHING
RIGHT.
IN OTHER WORDS, SEEK OUT THINGS
TO PRAISE.
THANKS SO MUCH.
FOR EXAMPLE, IT MEANT A LOT
TO ME WHEN YOU TOOK OUT
THE GARBAGE WITHOUT MY EVEN
ASKING.
THANKS.
IT MAKES MY LIFE EASIER.
Reporter: BUT HE OUGHT
TO TAKE OUT THE GARBAGE.
I HAVE TO PRAISE HIM FOR TAKING
OUT THE GARBAGE?
YEAH.
Reporter: IT'S NOT REALLY
NATURAL TO DO THAT.
IT'S MUCH MORE NATURAL TO SPEAK
UP WHEN HE DOESN'T TAKE OUT
THE GARBAGE.
TOUGH NOOGIES.
IF YOU KEEP FOCUSING
ON THE CRITICISM, THAT'S ALL
YOUR KID WILL HEAR, THAT'S ALL
THE WHOLE -- YOU'RE POLLUTING
YOUR FAMILY ENVIRONMENT.
Reporter: AT THE HYDE SCHOOL,
PARENTS MUST ATTEND PERIODIC
MEETINGS WHERE THEY'RE TAUGHT
MUCH OF WHAT YOU'VE HEARD THIS
HOUR.
YES, THERE MUST BE RULES,
BUT THE RULES SHOULD BE FEW,
TO ALLOW TEENS ROOM TO MAKE
THEIR OWN MISTAKES.
ABOVE ALL, THEY SAY, LECTURE
LESS AND LISTEN MORE.
LORI BROUGHT ASHLEY HERE.
FOR ME, IT'S LEARNING
TO LISTEN WITH MY MOUTH CLOSED
AND MY EARS OPEN, AND THAT
SHE MAY HAVE A LOT MORE WISDOM
THAN I GIVE HER CREDIT FOR.
Reporter: BEN'S MOM NOW
ADMITS THAT SHE'D FORGOTTEN
THE REAL GOAL IN PARENTING
A TEEN.
THEY WILL BE INDIVIDUALS
WITHOUT ME, AND THAT AFTER ALL
IS THE GOAL IS TO RAISE
OUR CHILDREN TO BE
SELF-SUFFICIENT.
Reporter: THEY'RE ALMOST
ADULTS, PARENTS ARE REMINDED.
YOU CAN SHOW THEM WHAT
YOUR VALUES ARE, BUT YOU CAN'T
CONTROL THEM ANYMORE.
SO JUST LOVE THEM AND LISTEN
TO THEM, AND WITH LUCK, THEY'LL
LET YOU INTO THEIR LIVES.
THAT'S HOW YOU KNOW YOU'RE
A SUCCESSFUL PARENT --
IF YOUR KID WILL TELL
YOU ANYTHING.
THAT SAVES KIDS' LIVES.
YOU SHOULD PUT UP A BANNER
IN YOUR LIVING ROOM THAT SAYS,
"WE CAN TALK ABOUT ANYTHING
HERE."
I'LL BE BACK WITH SOME FINAL
THOUGHTS, AFTER THIS.
AS I LISTENED TO THE FAMILY
THERAPISTS TALK ABOUT GIVING
OUR TEENS ROOM, NOT BEING
SO STRICT, IT SOUNDED LIKE WE'RE
SUPPOSED TO BE OUR TEENS'
FRIENDS.
BUT THE EXPERTS SAID, "NO, WHY
WOULD YOU WANT TO BE YOUR KID'S
FRIEND?
THEY DON'T KNOW ANYTHING,
AND THEIR MUSIC'S LOUSY."
INSTEAD, THEY SAID, BE AN ALLY.
SOMEONE WHO OFFERS HELP,
BUT DOESN'T TRY TO CONTROL.
FINALLY, THEY SAID, IF THEY'RE
DISOBEDIENT DURING THESE YEARS,
REMEMBER, THEY'LL USUALLY GROW
OUT OF IT.
THEY MAY INFURIATE YOU NOW,
BUT IN A FEW YEARS, THEY'LL BE
BACK.
AND IF THEY THEN THINK
OF YOU AS AN ALLY, THEY WILL
ALWAYS WANT TO BE PART
OF YOUR LIFE.
THAT'S OUR PROGRAM FOR TONIGHT.
I'LL BE BACK THIS THURSDAY
WITH A SPECIAL ABOUT AMBITION.
I CALL IT "GREED."
I'M JOHN STOSSEL.
GOOD NIGHT.
-- Captions by VITAC --
Burbank, Pittsburgh, Tampa,
and Washington, D.C.
CAPTIONS MADE POSSIBLE BY
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
AND ABC, INC.